About a month ago, January 22, Stellar changed forever, again. Protocol 25 landed and with it robust, real world, zk primitives connecting Stellar to a brave new world of opportunities, again.

Of course I had to get busy exploring, understanding, implementing and experimenting. The Stellar universe has become so unbelievably rich and diverse over the past years. What you can now tie together and dream up and implement is nearing infinity and with the assistance of AI to develop the speed of experimentation has never been faster.

I've always been intrigued by retro arcade games, even though I didn't play a whole lot as a kid. The arcade has always been a magical, mysterious place for me, and I definitely have a long history of playing old retro, pixelated PC games on my parents' old cathode ray tube in their room as a kid. The music and simplicity of the games have always captured my attention, not because they're easy but really because they're hard. Scoring high when you have a relatively limited set of variables is a real challenge that I have grown to love over the years, from my early days of gaming to now. It was no surprise that I decided to tackle Asteroids as my game of choice to experiment with the ZK stuff. A lot of ZK things are kind of privacy, payments, and obfuscation, but I feel like some of the best ways to understand something or begin to explore are actually to use games, which can actually be incredibly complex. When you're talking about things like points, scores, and leaderboards, the security is definitely paramount to ensuring fair, compelling, and addictive gameplay where players want to keep returning to try to beat their own or others' high scores. This seemed like a perfect place to try an experiment with ZK.

The challenge is that, at least in a blockchain ecosystem, proving anything that's physics-based is essentially impossible, right? My requirements were 60 frames per second for at least 10 minutes of gameplay. Most humans won't play that long. I wanted to encourage the use of CLI interactions where bots are playing games of Asteroids, with the idea being that bots would try to max score. I wanted to ensure that the games were always played fairly, that no matter whether you played as a human or you played as a bot, everybody was guaranteed to be playing by the same set of rules. These are physics-based games where:
- Asteroids are moving
- Bullets are shooting
- Saucers are flying
- Things are moving across the screen
- They're going in a particular direction
- There's throttle and fall-off
- Entropy and seeded RNG
- Lots of things going on  Again, it's not terribly complex, but it's definitely more complex than anything you could ever run on any of the blockchains that exist out there in the world today without spending an absolute fortune. I love this idea of using ZK to prove complex compute off-chain for use on-chain. The idea is that whatever score you get in the Asteroids game is the number of tokens that shall be minted. Let's imagine those tokens had monetary value. There's a huge incentive then to cheat to make your ship move as fast as it can, to shoot a billion bullets per second, to jump around the screen and actually have to fly there to spawn millions of asteroids. I don't know, there's all kinds of things you could want to cheat at. The ZK part of this codifies the rules of Asteroids into a, in this case, risk-zero virtual machine that produces a proof that then Stellar is now, after protocol 25, able to prove. Once that proof is verified, it's safe to then say this score is fair. I don't know who generated it. I don't know how it was generated, but I am absolutely certain that it was played. It was produced fairly. Whatever the score is, that's what I'll mint. A good example of this is that the average person could probably score about 50,000 points before dying, before it becomes too intense. There are already, on the leaderboard, scores of a million, so bots have been running algorithms that have been produced that way outperform humans. They're all playing by the exact same set of rules, which is awesome to me, but it hasn't gone above that. What's the max score that could possibly be proven? Hard to say. That's the fun of the game: trying to pursue that perfect high score, but it's now safe to prove that and then actually get monetary rewards on-chain. All of this compute, 60 frames per second of a complex physics-based shooter, is now getting proven off-chain in a way that's now safe to make rewards on-chain. That's amazing, but it has so many implications beyond just gaming, right?

You swap out games for other complex compute tasks; they can now be done off-chain, but proof is generated that can be given on-chain. The chain only has to do a minimal amount of work to actually accomplish a task of transferring some type of asset or minting something, or doing something that's far less complex. The chain can do the good, chain things that it does, like the distributed ledger, and the off-chain can do the complex compute. This is an amazing innovation that entirely shifts and changes what blockchains can be used for. Things that just could not have safely been done before are now relatively trivial, particularly when you are AI-assisted as an engineer. You can write the proof with AI, you can write the interface with AI, you can write a lot of the chain logic, contracts, and wallet infrastructure with AI. Write really good tests and then ensure that those tests maintain as you continue to develop the system. Now we're in an amazing time to begin crafting and creating entirely new interactions and systems that are very useful and impactful to the world. By being able to have this combination of distributed ledger technology for balance reconciliation, while still having complex computation happening on isolated singular machines, you have these proofs that verify that the computation that was run produced consistent results. That's, again, incredible and amazing, and something that a lot more developers need to start diving into. What better place to do that than in gaming and playing Kaliën?

I strongly encourage everyone to go play the game to build their own CLI farmer. There's actually an AMM that's already been stood up that pairs Kale versus Kaliën. If you're unfamiliar with the Kale project, that was one that I did a couple years ago exploring some other areas of Stellar, but it has kind of become a meme in the protocol and in the ecosystem. It's just a fun way to kind of tie these two things together. The name Kaliën definitely comes from kind of tying Asteroids and Kale aliens together. I definitely want to see people go play it, try and get up on that leaderboard. It's a good entry point for a lot of other people who are maybe new to blockchain or starting to dive around in zero-knowledge systems or smart wallet systems, or kind of combining real-world assets with complex off-chain compute. There's a lot of experiments that need to be run, a lot of work that needs to be done. I encourage everybody to play and then also to explore the repo and start mixing and matching, stealing from there. There's a lot of tech behind the scenes that actually pulls this off. That will be very useful to folks building on ZK, building on Risk Zero, building on Stellar. That will be very valuable and beneficial. Play around, share it around, enjoy, and let me know what your high score is.